================
QEMU TCG Plugins
================

:Version: 1.2
:Date: 2012-01-10
:Copyright: STMicroelectronics

.. sectnum::

.. contents::


Introduction
============

The TCG plugin support introduced in QEMU currently allows an external
shared library to be notified each time a basic block is translated
into the TCG internal representation, in the aim of instrumenting the
emulated code to produce program analysis, Ã  la Valgrind or DynamoRIO
for instance.

There are already five plugins available by default:

icount
    Count the number of executed *guest* instructions per CPU and
    produce a summary report each time CPUs are stopped::

        Number of executed instructions on CPU #0 = 678234533
        Number of executed instructions on CPU #1 = 36475675

icount-inlined
    Same as above but this plugin is *not* based on a helper, instead
    it inserts TCG opcodes inlined right at the beginning of each
    basic block, see `How to Write TCG Plugins?`_ for details.  This
    method is quite faster [#]_ but the current implementation is
    *not* thread-safe.

.. [#] Christophe GUILLON: Program Instrumentation with QEMU.  In 1st
       International QEMU Users' Forum 2010.

trace
    Print the address/size/name of the current emulated basic block.
    This is quite useful to find where two runs diverge or where a
    segmentation fault occurred::

        [...]
        CPU #0 - 0x00008270 [32]: 8 instruction(s) in '/tmp/a.out:main'
        CPU #0 - 0x00008230 [48]: 12 instruction(s) in '/tmp/a.out:test'
        CPU #0 - 0x00010ac0 [12]: 3 instruction(s) in '/lib/ld-2.10.1.so:memcpy'
        CPU #0 - 0x00010b54 [32]: 8 instruction(s) in '/lib/ld-2.10.1.so:memcpy'
        Segmentation fault

        $ addr2line -e a.out 0x00008230
        /usr/local/cedric/test.c:13

    Note that this plugin doesn't produce a call trace; for instance
    the function ``memcpy()`` isn't called twice in the previous
    example, there were just two basic blocks executed consecutively.

profile
    Count the number of executed *guest* bytes/instructions per symbol
    and produce a profile report each time CPUs are stopped::

        SYMBOL       | FILENAME            | #BYTES | #INSTR
        ----------------------------------------------------
        test         | /tmp/a.out          |     48 |     12
        memcpy       | /lib/ld-2.10.1.so   |    168 |     42
        main         | /tmp/a.out          |     32 |      8
        [...]

dineroIV-data
    Print the address/size/cpu of each loaded/stored data in a format
    supported by DineroIV, a highly configurable cache simulator::

        w 0x000000000046ca20 0x00000004 (0x0000000000000000) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e3c
        w 0x000000000046ca24 0x00000004 (0x0000000000000000) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e3e
        r 0x000000000046ca1c 0x00000004 (0x0000000000000001) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e46
        w 0x000000000046ca1c 0x00000004 (0x0000000000000000) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e4a
        r 0x000000000046bae0 0x00000004 (0x000000000046ba14) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e5c
        w 0x000000000046bb14 0x00000004 (0x00000000ffffffff) CPU #0 0x0000000000401e62

    This is a really good alternative to Cachegrind.


How to Use TCG Plugins?
=======================

QEMU doesn't enable the TCG plugin support by default, you have to
specify the option ``--enable-tcg-plugin`` to the ``configure``
script.  Then, both the system-mode and user-mode use the same
command-line interface::

    $ qemu-arm -tcg-plugin ./tcg-plugin-trace.so ...

You can also use the short-form name for plugins that are installed in
the plugin directory (default is ``/usr/local/libexec/qemu``)::

    $ qemu-arm -tcg-plugin trace ...

Some sanity checks are performed when the shared library is loaded to
ensure it is compatible with the current version of the TCG plugin
interface used by QEMU.  For instance you may encounter such errors::

    plugin: error: <errors from the dynamic linker>
    plugin: error: initialization has failed
    plugin: error: incompatible plugin interface
    plugin: error: incompatible CPUState structure size
    plugin: error: incompatible TranslationBlock structure size

However some checks only warn the user that a component *may* not be
compatible, which technically this could lead to unexpected
behaviors (see `Generic Plugin`_ for explanation)::

    plugin: warning: incompatible guest CPU
    plugin: warning: incompatible emulation mode

All plugins share a common set of options passed through environment
variables:

TPI_OUTPUT=file
    Specify where the plugin writes information: ``file``.``$PID``,
    this IO stream is line-buffered unless the default output is used
    (``stderr``).

TPI_VERBOSE
    Print information about the loaded plugin (in TPI_OUTPUT).

TPI_LOW_PC
    Specify the lowest PC address (*inclusive*) for which the plugin
    is notified.

TPI_HIGH_PC
    Specify the highest PC address (*exclusive*) for which the plugin
    is notified.

TPI_SYMBOL_PC=name
    Define TPI_LOW_PC/TPI_HIGH_PC according to the value/size of the
    symbol ``name``. This option isn't supported yet.

TPI_MUTEX_PROTECTED
    Protect the call to ``pre_tb_helper_code`` with a mutex.

Note that currently notification works in a per basic block basis,
that is, the plugin is notified for any basic block that contains
TPI_LOW_PC or TPI_HIGH_PC.


How to Write TCG Plugins?
=========================

Build System
------------

By default, any ``.c`` file lying in the directory ``tcg/plugins`` is
considered to be a single plugin source.  If you had to specify
specific CLFAGS/LDFLAGS for your plugin, just add them in the file
``Makefile.target`` like it was done for the ``profile`` plugin::

    tcg-plugin-profile.o: CFLAGS += $(shell pkg-config --cflags glib-2.0)
    tcg-plugin-profile.so: LDFLAGS += $(shell pkg-config --libs glib-2.0)


Initialization
--------------

Once the shared library is loaded into QEMU's address space, its
``tpi_init()`` function is called to initialize the TCG plugin::

    #include "tcg-plugin.h"
    void tpi_init(TCGPluginInterface *)

First, this function has to fill in the fields of
``TCGPluginInterface`` related to *compatibility* information so that
QEMU can perform the sanity checks described in section `How to Use
TCG Plugins?`_::

    struct TCGPluginInterface
    {
        /* Compatibility information.  */
        int version;
        const char *guest;
        const char *mode;
        size_t sizeof_CPUState;
        size_t sizeof_TranslationBlock;
        
        /* Common parameters.  */
        int nb_cpus;
        FILE *output;
        uint64_t low_pc;
        uint64_t high_pc;
        bool verbose;
        
        /* Parameters for non-generic plugins.  */
        bool is_generic;
        const CPUState *env;
        const TranslationBlock *tb;
        
        /* Plugin's callbacks.  */
        tpi_cpus_stopped_t cpus_stopped;
        tpi_before_gen_tb_t before_gen_tb;
        tpi_after_gen_tb_t  after_gen_tb;
        tpi_pre_tb_helper_code_t pre_tb_helper_code;
        tpi_pre_tb_helper_data_t pre_tb_helper_data;
        tpi_after_gen_opc_t after_gen_opc;
    };

For convenience, there are two C macros that automatically set these
fields.  The former macro uses proper values (``"arm"``, ``"user"``,
...) whereas the latter uses generic values (``"any"`` or ``0``) that
tell QEMU to skip some checks for `generic plugin`_.  Both macros set
``version`` to the value TPI_VERSION defined in ``tcg-plugin.h``, but
this field can be set to ``0`` if the TCG plugin wants to report an
initialization failure to QEMU::

    TPI_INIT_VERSION(TCGPluginInterface)

    TPI_INIT_VERSION_GENERIC(TCGPluginInterface)

Then, this function is used to declare each callback implemented by
the plugin, see next section for details.  Here is an example::

    tpi->pre_tb_helper_code = pre_tb_helper_code;
    tpi->cpus_stopped = cpus_stopped;


Translation-Time Callbacks
--------------------------

There are currently four regular callbacks available, all are called
at `translation-time`_, see `Two Kinds of Flow`_ for details.  In the
following descriptions, the short terms *tb* and *opc* stand for
*Translated Block* and *Operation Code* respectively.  Note that a
given plugin doesn't have to provide all of these callbacks, they are
*all* optional.


cpus_stopped
````````````

This function is called when all emulated CPUs are stopped (on exit,
reboot, ...) and is mainly used to print analysis reports.  Its
declaration is::

    void cpus_stopped(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi)


before_gen_tb
`````````````

This function is called before a basic block is translated from
*guest* instructions to TCG opcodes, and it is mainly used to insert
TCG opcodes or calls to helpers.  Its declaration is::

    void before_gen_tb(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi)


after_gen_tb
````````````

This function is called after a basic block is translated from *guest*
instructions to TCG opcodes, and it is mainly used to patch the value
of variables that were undefined when ``before_gen_tb()`` was called,
this is typically the case for ``tb->size`` and ``tb->icount``.  Its
declaration is::

    void after_gen_tb(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi)


after_gen_opc
``````````````

This function is called after a TCG opcode is emitted, and it is
mainly used to insert TCG opcodes or calls to helpers.  Its
declaration is::

    void after_gen_opc(TCGOpcode opname, uint16_t *opcode, TCGArg *opargs, uint8_t nb_args);



Callbacks for Predefined Helpers
--------------------------------

There are two predefined helpers, the first one is called *before* the
execution of a translated block (`execution-time`_) and the second one
is called *after* the translation of a opcode (`translation-time`_).
Note that a given plugin doesn't have to provide all of these
callbacks, they are *all* optional.


pre_tb_helper_code
``````````````````

This function is called each time a translated basic block is executed
and is mainly used to collect analysis data.  Its declaration is::

    void pre_tb_helper_code(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi,
                        TPIHelperInfo info, uint64_t address,
                        uint64_t data1, uint64_t data2)

When QEMU calls this function, a mutex is used to avoid than more one
thread executes it at the same time.  That means the resources only
used by this function are protected from concurrent access.

The parameter ``info`` is a 64-bit structure defined as below.  Its
fields ``size`` and ``icount`` are respectively the size of, and the
number of *guest* instructions in, the translated basic block.  These
two fields are set to ``0`` when QEMU is re-translating an interrupted
block::

    typedef struct
    {
        uint16_t cpu_index;
        uint16_t size;
        uint32_t icount;
    } __attribute__((__packed__)) TPIHelperInfo;

The optional parameters ``data1`` and ``data2`` are defined at
translation-time by the function ``pre_tb_helper_data()``, that means they
keep their initial values (for a given basic block) during the
execution.

.. TODO: explain why called before the execution of the translated
         block (safest + most useful)


pre_tb_helper_data
``````````````````

This function is called each time a basic block *was* translated
(**not executed**) and is mainly used to define the parameters passed
to ``pre_tb_helper_code()``.  Its declaration is::

    void pre_tb_helper_data(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi,
                            TPIHelperInfo info, uint64_t address,
                            uint64_t *data1, uint64_t *data2)

The parameter ``info`` is the same as above and the pointers ``data1``
and ``data2`` reference the eponymous parameters of
``pre_tb_helper_code()`` for the given translated block.  Note that they
are defined at translation-time, that is, they can't be changed later
on.  See `Two Kinds of Flow`_ for explanation.  Technically ``data1``
and ``data2`` can hold anything and are particularly useful to
optimize the execution of the ``pre_tb_helper_code()`` as described in
section `Optimization`_.


Two Kinds of Flow
-----------------

Every plugin writer should keep in mind that there are two kinds of
flow: translation-time and execution-time.


Translation-Time
````````````````

When the emulated program jumps to a portion of code not translated
yet, QEMU invokes the Tiny Code Generator -- TCG for short -- to
convert *guest* CPU instructions into *host* CPU instructions.  This
conversion happens only once per basic block [#X]_, that is, the next
time the emulated program jumps to this portion of code, the *host*
version of the basic block is executed directly [#X]_.  The
translation flow looks like this diagram::

    +---------------------------------+
    | the program has branched to a   |
    | basic block not translated yet  |
    +---------------------------------+
                     |
            +------------------+
            |  before_gen_tb() |
            +------------------+
                     |
    +---------------------------------+
    |     gen_intermediate_code()     |       +-------------------+
    |  translates guest instructions  | - - - |     gen_opc()     |
    |        into TCG opcodes         |       | opc_helper_data() |
    +---------------------------------+       +-------------------+
                     |
          +----------------------+
          |    after_gen_tb()    |
          | pre_tb_helper_data() |
          +----------------------+
                     |
    +---------------------------------+
    |   TCG opcodes are translated    |
    |      into host instructions     |
    +---------------------------------+

.. [#X] this isn't accurate, but it's OK for this explanation.


Execution-Time
``````````````

As said in the previous section, once *guest* instructions of a basic
block are translated to *host* instructions, they are executed
directly when the emulated program jumps to this portion of code
[#X]_.  That means any TCG opcodes and/or calls to helpers inserted at
translation-time will be triggered each time this portion of code is
executed.

Let's take the example below::

    block1:
        i++
        if i < 10
            goto block1
    block2:
        i = 0
        goto block1

The function ``pre_tb_helper_code()`` is called each time the translated
version of ``block1`` and ``block2`` are executed.  The execution flow
looks like this diagram::

                    +<-------------------+<--+
                    |                    |   |
    +--------------------------------+   |   |
    | pre_tb_helper_code() then the  |   |   |
    | translated block1 are executed |   |   |
    +--------------------------------+   |   |
                    |                    |   |
                    +------------------->+   |
                    |                        |
    +--------------------------------+       |
    | pre_tb_helper_code() then the  |       |
    | translated block2 are executed |       |
    +--------------------------------+       |
                    |                        |
                    +----------------------->+


Advices
-------

Deterministic code generation
`````````````````````````````

When an asynchronous event interrupt the execution of a translated
block (typically an exception), QEMU has to re-translate the
interrupted block to create a mapping between host PC addresses and
guest PC addresses, so as to retrieve which was the *virtual* guest PC
when the interruption occurred.  That means the translation process has
to be deterministic to ensure the mapping created during the
re-translation is the same as in the initial translation.

For instance on x86_64 host, the TCG opcode ``movi_i64 tmp6,$value``
can be translated to two different host instructions (with two
different sizes) according to the value of its operands::

    mov    $value,%ecx

or::

    movabs $value,%rcx

In this case the re-translation may create a wrong guest-host PC
mapping that might crash QEMU.


Pointer
```````

As a plugin writer, you shall not dereference at execution-time a
pointer that you aren't absolutely sure its contents will not be freed
or moved.  For instance, you can't access safely at execution-time [a
field of] a ``TranslationBlock`` the way below since there's a chance
that sooner or later the pointer ``tb`` will be freed::

    ... before_gen_tb(...)
    {
        ptr = tcg_const_ptr(tpi->tb);
        // generate TCG opcodes that use
	// "((TranslationBlock *)ptr)->flags"
    }

Instead, you have to **copy** the needed field(s)::

    ... before_gen_tb(...)
    {
        TCGv_i64 pc = tcg_const_i64(tpi->tb->flags);
    }


Optimization
````````````

It's worth saying the more analysis is done at translation-time, the
less analysis is done at execution-time.  For instance, you can call
``lookup_symbol(pc)`` in ``pre_tb_helper_code()`` to get the name of the
function currently executed, but it will be called each time the given
block is executed::

    ... pre_tb_helper_code(...)
    {
        const char *symbol = lookup_symbol(address);
    }

Since the matching ``pc/symbol`` never changes, it's cheaper to call
``lookup_symbol(pc)`` in ``pre_tb_helper_data()`` -- thus once per basic
block translation -- to store the result in ``data1`` and then use
this pointer directly in ``pre_tb_helper_code()``::

    ... pre_tb_helper_code(...)
    {
        const char *symbol = (const char *)data1;
    }

    ... pre_tb_helper_data(...)
    {
        const char *symbol = lookup_symbol(address);
        *data1 = (uint64_t)symbol;
    }

You can go even further by analyzing the trace with a post-treatment
tool, as the plugin ``dineroIV`` does.


Multi-threading
```````````````

The Tiny Code Generator is mono-threaded, however it can generate code
that is not, as it's typically the case when emulating a
multi-threaded program in user-mode.  As a consequence the plugin
writer has to take special care of the code she/he emits for
execution-time, either in the form of TCG opcodes or calls to helpers.
For instance the plugin ``icount-inlined`` produces code that is not
thread-safe since there's a chance that several threads increment the
counter simultaneously in a non-atomic way.


Limit of a TCG-based approach
`````````````````````````````

There are two main limitations of an approach based on TCG: the first
one is that not all guest instructions are converted to TCG opcodes,
some are converted to a call to helper (typically floating point
instructions).  The second limitation is that there's no easy way to
handle a guest instruction while manipulating its TCG translation
(note that one guest instruction is likely composed of several TCG
opcodes).


Generic Plugin
``````````````

A plugin is considered to be *generic* -- and thus can use the macro
TPI_INIT_VERSION_GENERIC() -- if it doesn't perform access to
``tpi->env`` of ``tpi->tb`` since these structures are different from
one CPU and/or mode to another, unlike ``TPIHelperInfo``.  Actually
when a plugin declares itself as generic, these two fields are always
``NULL`` to avoid any mistake.  For instance the plugins ``icount``
and ``icount-inlined`` basically do the same thing but this latter
isn't generic because it can't be used with a version of QEMU built
for another CPU and/or mode.


Custom Helper
`````````````

You can define your own helper but it isn't really straightforward.
To explain how to do this, we will take a simple example::

    void helper_example(uint64_t data)
    {
         printf("0x%016" PRIx64 "\n", data);
    }

First create a C header file -- let's say ``example-helper.h`` -- with
the following content::

    #include "def-helper.h"
    DEF_HELPER_1(example, void, i64)
    #include "def-helper.h"

Then, add the following code at the beginning of your plugin's
source::

    #include "tcg-op.h"
    #include "example-helper.h"
    #define GEN_HELPER 1
    #include "example-helper.h"

Now you can *insert* a call to this helper in the prologue of any
translated block::

    ... before_gen_tb(...)
    {
        TCGv_i64 pc = tcg_const_i64((uint64_t)address);
        gen_helper_example(pc);
        tcg_temp_free_i64(pc);
    }

Finally, you have to *declare* the helper to QEMU::

    ... tpi_init(...)
    {
        #define GEN_HELPER 2
        #include "example-helper.h"
    }

For information, the following table gives the matching between TCG
types and C types:

==================  ==================
TCG types           C types
==================  ==================
i32                 uint32_t
s32                 int32_t
int                 int
i64                 uint64_t
s64                 int64_t
f32                 float32
f64                 float64
tl                  target_ulong
ptr                 void *
void                void
env                 CPUState *
==================  ==================


Example
=======

The *full* code of a simplified version of the ``trace`` plugin is
given as an example below.  As you can see, it uses the optimization
explained in a previous section::

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdint.h>
    #include <inttypes.h>

    #include "tcg-plugin.h"
    #include "disas.h"

    static void pre_tb_helper_code(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi,
                               TPIHelperInfo info, uint64_t address,
                               uint64_t data1, uint64_t data2)
    {
        const char *symbol = (const char *)(uintptr_t)data1;

        fprintf(tpi->output, "%d instruction(s) in '%s' @ %#lx\n",
                info.icount, symbol, address);
    }

    static void pre_tb_helper_data(const TCGPluginInterface *tpi,
                               TPIHelperInfo info, uint64_t address,
                               uint64_t *data1, uint64_t *data2)
    {
        const char *symbol = lookup_symbol(address);
        *data1 = (uintptr_t)symbol;
    }

    void tpi_init(TCGPluginInterface *tpi)
    {
        TPI_INIT_VERSION_GENERIC(*tpi);
        tpi->pre_tb_helper_code = pre_tb_helper_code;
        tpi->pre_tb_helper_data = pre_tb_helper_data;
    }


Performance Impact
==================

How to reproduce
----------------

=============  ================================
host distro    Slackware64 13.37
guest distro   ARMedSlack 13.37
guest program  Links 2.3pre1 [#]_
input data     off-line version of a blog post_
plugins        both per-block and per-opcode
=============  ================================

.. [#] mono-threaded console-based web-browser
.. _post: http://perl6advent.wordpress.com/2011/12/14/meta-programming-what-why-and-how/


Results
-------

======================================  ====================
Instrumentation                         Slowdown
======================================  ====================
none (reference)                                          0%
inlined                                                  ~3%
helper does nothing                                    ~ 25%
helper does nothing, mutex protected             100% ~ 200%
helper calls getsymbol() @ translation             25% ~ 30%
helper calls getsymbol() @ execution                  ~ 900%
helper prints a in file @ execution            3000% ~ 5000%
======================================  ====================


Conclusion
----------

Don't take these results to conclude about the TCG plugin support
since, as you can see, the slowdown heavily depends on the kind of
operations made in the plugin itself: file IOs, execution-time
vs. translation-time, inlining, mutex protection, ...
